.TH MSEED2ASCII 1 2018/03/15
.SH NAME
mseed2ascii \- miniSEED to ASCII converter

.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
mseed2ascii [options] file1 [file2 file3 ...]

.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBmseed2ascii\fP converts miniSEED time-series data to ASCII formats,
either simple text or GeoCSV.  If an input file name is prefixed with
an '@' character the file is assumed to contain a list of input data
files, see \fILIST FILES\fP below.

A separate output file is written for each continuous time-series in
the input data.  Output file names are of the form:

.nf
"Net.Sta.Loc.Chan.Qual.YYYY-MM-DDTHHMMSS.FFFFFF.txt"
or
"Net.Sta.Loc.Chan.Qual.YYYY-MM-DDTHHMMSS.FFFFFF.csv"
.fi

.nf
For example:
"TA.ELFS..LHZ.R.2006-04-22T153619.000000.txt"
.fi

If the input file name is "-" input miniSEED records will be read
from standard input.

.SH OPTIONS

.IP "-V         "
Print program version and exit.

.IP "-h         "
Print program usage and exit.

.IP "-v         "
Be more verbose.  This flag can be used multiple times ("-v -v" or
"-vv") for more verbosity.

.IP "-dr        "
Use the sampling rate derived from the start and end times and the
number of samples instead of the rate specified in the input data.
This is useful when the sample rate in the input data does not have
enough resolution to represent the true rate.

.IP "-i         "
Process each input file individually.  By default all input files are
read and all data is buffered in memory before ASCII files are written.
This allows time-series spanning mutilple input files to be merged and
written in a single ASCII file.  The intention is to use this option
when processing large amounts of data in order to keep memory usage
within reasonable limits.

.IP "-G         "
Produce GeoCSV formatted output. With this option multi-column sample
lists are not allowed, i.e. the \fB-c\fP option is ignored.

.IP "-c \fIcols\fP"
Specify the number of columns to use for sample list formatted output,
default is 1 column.

.IP "-u \fIunits\fP"
Specify the units string that should be included in the ASCII output
headers, the default is "Counts".

.IP "-m \fImetafile\fP"
Specify a file containing metadata such as coordinates, elevation,
component orientation, scaling factor, etc.  For each time-series
written any matching metadata will be added to the SAC header.  See
\fIMETADATA FILES\fP below.

.IP "-M \fImetaline\fP"
Specify a "line" of metadata in the same format as expected for the
\fIMETADATA FILES\fP.  This option may be specified multiple times.

.IP "-s         "
Scale the data, inversely, by the scale factor in metadata.  Integer
data will be converted to float type.  The relavent units from the
metadata will be reported in the header.

.IP "-f \fIformat\fP"
The default output format is sample list.  This option applies to all
output files:

.nf
1 : Sample list format, header includes time stamp of first
2 : Time-sample pair format, each sample value listed with time stamp
.fi

.IP "-o \fIoutfile\fP"
Write all ASCII output to \fIoutfile\fP, if \fIoutfile\fP is a single
dash (-) then all output will go to stdout.  If this option is not
specified each contiguous segment is written to a separate file.  All
diagnostic output from the program is written to stderr and should
never get mixed with data going to stdout.

.IP "-z \fIzipfile\fP"
Create a ZIP archive containing all SAC files instead of writing
individual files.  Each file is compressed with the deflate method.
Specify \fB"-"\fP (dash) to write ZIP archive to stdout.

.IP "-z0 \fIzipfile\fP"
Same as \fI"-z"\fP except do not compress the SAC files.  Specify
\fB"-"\fP (dash) to write ZIP archive to stdout.

.IP "-r \fIbytes\fP"
Specify the miniSEED record length in \fIbytes\fP, by default this is
autodetected.

.IP "-tt \fIsecs\fP"
Specify a time tolerance for constructing continous trace segments.
The tolerance is specified in seconds.  The default tolerance is 1/2
of the sample period.

.IP "-rt \fIdiff\fP"
Specify a sample rate tolerance for constructing continous trace
segments.  The tolerance is specified as the difference between two
sampling rates.  The default tolerance is tested as: (abs(1-sr1/sr2) <
0.0001).

.SH "METADATA FILES"
A metadata file contains a list of station parameters, some of which
can be stored in SAC but not in miniSEED.  Each line in a metadata
file should be a list of parameters in the order shown below.  Each
parameter should be separated with a comma or a vertical bar (|).
\fbDIP CONVENTION:\fP When comma separators are used the dip field
(CMPINC) is assumed to be in the SAC convention (degrees down from
vertical up/outward), if vertical bars are used the dip field is
assumed to be in the SEED convention (degrees down from horizontal)
and converted to SAC convention.

\fBMetdata fields\fP:
.nf
Network
Station
Location
Channel
Latitude
Longitude
Elevation, in meters
Depth, in meters
Component Azimuth, degrees clockwise from north
Component Dip, degrees from horizontal
Instrument Name
Scale Factor
Scale Frequency
Scale Units
Sampling rate
Start time, used for matching
End time, used for matching

Example with vertical bar separators (with SEED convention dip):

------------------
#net|sta|loc|chan|lat|lon|elev|depth|azimuth|SEEDdip|instrument|scale|scalefreq|scaleunits|samplerate|start|end
IU|ANMO|00|BH1|34.945981|-106.457133|1671|145|328|0|Geotech KS-54000|3456610000|0.02|M/S|20|2008-06-30T20:00:00|2599-12-31T23:59:59
IU|ANMO|00|BH2|34.945981|-106.457133|1671|145|58|0|Geotech KS-54000|3344370000|0.02|M/S|20|2008-06-30T20:00:00|2599-12-31T23:59:59
IU|ANMO|00|BHZ|34.945981|-106.457133|1671|145|0|-90|Geotech KS-54000|3275080000|0.02|M/S|20|2008-06-30T20:00:00|2599-12-31T23:59:59
------------------

As a special case '--' can be used to match an empty location code.
.fi

For each time-series written, metadata from the first line with
matching source name parameters (network, station, location and
channel) and time window (if specified) will be inserted into the
GeoCSV headers.  All parameters are optional except for the first four
fields specifying the source name parameters.

Simple wildcarding: for the source name parameters that will be
matched a '*' character in a field will match anything.  The BHZ
metadata lines above, for example, can be (almost) summarized as:

.nf
IU|ANMO|*|BHZ|34.9459|-106.4571|1671|145|0|0|Geotech KS-54000|3456610000|0.02|M/S|20|2008-06-30T20:00:00|2599-12-31T23:59:59
.fi

.SH LIST FILES
If an input file is prefixed with an '@' character the file is assumed
to contain a list of file for input.  Multiple list files can be
combined with multiple input files on the command line.  The last,
space separated field on each line is assumed to be the file name to
be read.

An example of a simple text list:

.nf
TA.ELFS..LHE.R.mseed
TA.ELFS..LHN.R.mseed
TA.ELFS..LHZ.R.mseed
.fi

.SH AUTHOR
.nf
Chad Trabant
IRIS Data Management Center
.fi
